Chagres and the Rejected Settlement at Chilibre, the transfer point Chagres refers both to the river that connects the interior to the Caribbean side, and to the Spanish counting house, warehouse, trade transfer point established at the furthest inland point that the river’s many oarmen and polemen could navigate.

In the fugitives’ original appearance and negotiations in June, the court record stated that after establishing a settlement at Chilibre the free Black subjects would “have with the Spanish householders that live [in Chilibre] peace, agreement, and friendship as befits [free Black subjects] as the Christians they were [in name] and wished to prove [themselves] in deed.”[^1] A settlement at Chilibre, located along the Camino Real, would have placed this nascent free town squarely at the heart of the imperial zones of the upland isthmus. Given the vast discrepancy between the amount of territory over which Spain claimed imperial control and the amount of territory that was actively within imperial control, Don Luis Mozambique and his community may have actively pushed back against an order to establish their settlement so clearly within a space under the imperial gaze. 

As part of this declaration, the community was ordered to settle at “Chilibre, which is between Cruces and Venta de Chagre on the river, six and a half or seven leagues from this city”[^2] and that “within the given period [of three months] Don Luis shall deliver all his people and subjects, without hiding a single person man or woman.”[^3] In addition, the court declared that the Spanish captain Antonio de Saucedo go with them “in order to see all the population, the rivers, bays, ports, and land where these Black subjects lived.”[^4]

When Don Luis Mozambique, his field marshal Pedro Sape, and captain Antonio de Saucedo returned to the court three months later in September 1579, they challenged the original instruction that the free Black subjects settle at Chilibre. The transcript of the hearing on September 20 offers an explicit rejection of Chilibre stated simply in terms of health: “The site at Chilibre was not as agreeable for health.”[^5] Both within this particular transcript and elsewhere in geographic descriptions of Tierra Firme, several themes are repeated concerning what makes a particular place unhealthy.

Spaniards’ beliefs about the ill health and poor quality of the air and land comprise the category of explicit reasons why Saucedo would have called Chilibre “not as agreeable for health.” When he explains why a settlement at Rio de Francisco would be preferable to Chilibre, Saucedo describes the tangible, physical qualities of the land in ample detail. However, the court records also offer an implicit assessment of the Chilibre settlement site that could reflect and derive from the free Black subjects’ negotiation with imperial space and the colonial gaze. Why wouldn’t they have wanted to establish themselves at Chagres? Probably for the simple fact of it being so central to the trade cycles and thus within reach of Spanish surveillance. But, what was it that they did choose?

Nombre de Dios and Portobelo: The Grave of Spaniards, often struck by disastrous disease during the weeks the fleet was in port (McNeill) Nombre de Dios and the northern side of the mountains were much more sparsely populated. Criado wrote that Nombre de Dios had two hundred houses but a year-round population of only fifty Spanish householders. When the Spanish fleet was in port, householders who lived elsewhere would return to Nombre de Dios to take advantage of the commercial opportunities presented by the influx of products and people. At other times of year, however, Spaniards avoided the city as much as possible: “It is a very unhealthy place due to being surrounded by very thick, closed-off mountains; many people from the Spanish fleets die here, such that it has the reputation of a ‘Grave of Spaniards.’ It rains the majority of the year, the sky is always cloudy, and it is excessively hot. This city is infested with pirates by sea and fugitives by land.”[^6]

San Francisco, The site that they ultimately agreed upon was at Rio de Francisco, in the mountains above Nombre de Dios. The declaration of this change states that site would be “better and more convenient for the health, increase, and preservation of the aforementioned Black subjects and settlers, keeping in mind that this place is high ground, clear of debris, that air can flow freely, that it is free of dense groves and apart from swamps, and that this village might enjoy good water, and fine lands to clear, till, and sow, and commons and pastures for their livestock great and small.”[^7]

  Through the eyes of Don Luis Mozambique, his followers, and his family, the Rio Francisco would likely have presented very different advantages.

After the question of the settlement’s location had been resolved to the agreement of all parties, the court spoke at great length on how the settlement should be organized socially and spatially. The practice and ideology of _reducción_ were built upon the Spanish assumptions about the benefits of living in towns and cities. A citizen of an early modern Iberian city was enmeshed in a network of responsibilities and obligations to one’s neighbors, one’s confessional authorities, and one’s political sovereigns. Herzog argues that this _vecindad_, or “local belonging,” was the constellation of rights derived from membership in a community and the obligations or duties necessary to claim that belonging.[^8] Without a city, an _urbs_, to which one owed loyalty, a population would never develop the desired moral characteristics of group membership, *civitas.*[^9]

To colonial town planners, the ideal physical layout of these _pueblos de indios_ was directly representative of the social and moral values these spaces would inculcate in the newly settled population. The September 1579 description of how this new Black town should be organized references many of the most important cornerstones of colonial town planning. 

In your majesty’s name, [the judges] ordered that don Luis Mozambique, with Pedro Sape his field marshal, their captains and soldiers, and people, women and children, should settle together at the indicated place alongside the Rio de Francisco, in a town formed with a plaza, crossed streets, and a church, a town named and called Santiago del Principe.[^10]

According to the court record here, Santiago del Principe should be centered around “the church… town hall… prison and gallows on the plaza for the provision of justice, and broad, fine streets well laid out into blocks"[^11] In the mind of the Spanish, a checkerboard urban design centered around a plaza housing the church, town hall, pillory, and prison, gave physical expression to the desired social norms of order, regularity, and uniformity. Thus, as Kagan describes it, "the plaza served as both a school and a theater where the rudiments of _policía_ [order, law, justice, religion] were taught."[^12] These detailed descriptions of the expected arrangement of a free Black town address many facets of life, everything from the provision of justice to how to properly contain livestock. Future research on Santiago del Principe could compare these expectations against those given to other settled fugitive communities elsewhere in the circum-Caribbean, which Landers suggests coalesced into a pan-ethnic _cimarrón_ identity.[^13] Another avenue of further analysis could investigate to what extent the material reality of these free Black towns aligned or diverged from the notarial dictates given at the time of their _reducción._

The documents surrounding the free Black town of Santiago del Principe and its settlement by Don Luis Mozambique and the 55 men, women, and children following him reveal the ongoing negotiation of authority that characterized the contested space of sixteenth century Tierra Firme. The mere fact of Spanish claims to territory did not imply that these claims were actualized on the ground. The Spanish declaration of certain parameters for how free Black settlements should be organized did not imply that these communities closely hewed to those parameters.

  

---

[^8]:  Tamar Herzog, _Defining Nations: Immigrants and Citizens in Early Modern Spain and Spanish America_ (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003).

[^9]: Richard L. Kagan, _Urban Images of the Hispanic World, 1493-1793_ (New Haven [Conn.]: Yale University Press, 2000); Jeremy Ravi Mumford, _Vertical Empire: The General Resettlement of Indians in the Colonial Andes_ (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012).

[^10]:  “ellos a nombre de su majestad, mandaban y mandaron que el dicho don Luis Mazambique con el dicho don Pedro Sape, su maese de campo y capitanes y soldados y gente y mujeres e hijos pueblen juntos junto al dicho rio de Francisca en la parte y lugar que fuere señalado en pueblo formado con su plaza y calles cruces e iglesia, el cual dicho pueblo se nombre y llame la Villa de Santiago del Príncipe” _Sobre los negros de Portobelo_, 20 September 1579.

[^11]:  “iglesia en ella… casas de ayuntamiento… cárcel y horca en la plaza para la ejecución de la justicia, y que las calles sean anchas y buenas y las cuadras bien trazadas.” _Sobre los negros de Portobelo_, 20 September 1579.

[^12]:  Kagan, _Urban Images of the Hispanic World,_ 33-34.

[^13]: Jane Landers, “_Cimarron_ and Citizen: African Ethnicity, Corporate Identity, and the Evolution of Free Black Towns in the Spanish Circum-Caribbean,” in Jane Landers and Barry Robinson eds., _Slaves, Subjects, and Subversives: Blacks in Colonial Latin America_ (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 2006).

[^1]: “tener con los vecinos españoles que en ella residiesen aquel paz y concordia y amor que convenía tener como cristianos que ellos era y querían mostrar por obra” _Reducción,_ 30 June 1579.

[^2]: “Chilibre que es entre Cruces y Venta de Chagre con sus rios que esta seis leguas y media o siete de esta ciudad.” _Reducción,_ 30 June 1579.    

[^3]: “dentro del dicho termino manifiesten toda su gente y sujetos sin ocultar a persona alguna, así varones como mujeres.” _Reducción,_ 30 June 1579.    

[^4]: “que viese toda la tierra y poblaciones ríos y caletas y puertos y tierra donde los dichos negros habitaban” _Reducción,_ 30 June 1579.    

[^5]: “El dicho sitio de Chilibre no era tal cual convenía para la salud.” _Sobre los negros de Portobelo_, 20 September 1579. In Jopling, _Indios y negros en Panamá,_ 375-378.

[^6]: “es tierra muy mal sana a causa de estar rodeada por la parte de tierra de montes muy espesos y cerrados que la cercan, por do mucha gente de las flotas de España mueren allí, de manera que la reputan por sepultura de españoles. Llueve la mayor del año y el cielo esta así siempre nublado y hace calor excesivo. Está este pueblo muy infestado de los corsarios de la Mar del Norte y de cimarrones por tierra.” Criado de Castilla, _Sumaria descripción,_ 7 May 1575

[^7]: “mejor y más conveniente para la salud y aumento y conservación de los dichos negros y pobladores, teniendo cuenta que el asiento sea tierra alta y escombrada y puedan correr los aires sin pesadumbre y que sea limpia de arboledas y apartado de ciénegas y que pueda gozar la dicha villa de buenas aguas y participar de buenas tierras para su rozas, labranzas y sementeras y ejidos y pastos para sus ganados mayores y menores.” _Sobre los negros de Portobelo_, 20 September 1579.